You may have heard Donald Trump, the  2024 Republican presidential nominee, call immigrants a toxin to the United States in a rally. This echoes his prior rhetoric in his 2016 presidential campaign. He has previously declared that migrants are “bringing crime”. His comments disregard the consequences of prior anti-immigrant policy in the United States. These past policies warn us that future Trump policies may lead to human suffering. As a former president, Trump’s actions concerning immigration reform have been dangerous and dehumanizing toward migrants who try to cross the border illegally. Since Trump has great chances to win the 2024 election, the public should scrutinize his planned actions. Donald Trump’s policies as former president have led to dehumanization of migrants. During his term in office, Trump began the construction of the border wall between the United States and Mexico by making demands to congress. . The border wall construction stopped during Joe Biden’s term in office. Despite the construction being halted, between 2020, and 2023, border drownings have increased by more than 30 times. Between 2019 and 2022, people began to die along the border due to falls due to increases in barrier height. These increases in deaths evidently show that Trump’s prior border policy has led to increased deaths of migrants attempting to cross. With Trump’s recent comments and plans, his reelection will allow him to cause increased devastation to the migrants. Additionally, Trump has burdened Mexico and migrants through his rhetoric and policies. In his 2016 campaign, Trump promised that Mexico will pay for the wall. This promise allowed Trump to gain support by assuming liability on Mexico. In 2018, president Trump passed the Migrant Protection Protocols, which forced asylum seekers to remain in Mexico as their applications were under review. Forcing asylum seekers to remain in Mexico implies that they would have to remain in the north of Mexico to access the checkpoints for the process. The north of Mexico is plagued with cartel crime and violence. Forcing the asylum seekers to remain in Mexico forces them into dangerous situations due to crime in their surroundings. This shows how Trump’s rhetoric and policies compromise the safety and security of migrants. While his policies had led to additional human deaths, previous administrations have done similar activities. In 1980, Ronald Reagan pushed for the securitization of the border between the United States and Mexico, citing undocumented migrants as a national security issue. In 1986, Reagan signed an immigration reform bill into law which increased border surveillance. However, undocumented migrants have increasingly avoided obviously surveilled areas, usually urban barriers, often crossing into dangerous remote sectors. Migrants crossing into such unsettled areas prevents them from getting medical attention due to the lack of development in these regions. Trump’s border rhetoric is similar to other dangerous rhetorics. In 1971, United States President Richard Nixon declared that drugs were “America’s public enemy number one,” sparking a widespread movement against drugs. The ensuing war on drugs led to severe racial disparities within the American prison system. While this draws similarities to Trump’s and Regan’s rhetoric about the border, this has additional and concerning points of comparison. In 2016, a report revealed that John Erlichmann, a former Aide of Nixon, knew that the war on drugs was, in reality, a deliberate effort by Nixon to disrupt political opponents. In the case of Trump’s rhetoric, illegal crossings were at a low when construction of the wall began. Coupled with his misleading descriptions of apprehensions as border crossings, this shows how Trump’s border rhetoric is built on a non-existent “crisis”. The similar effects and motives of Nixon’s rhetoric suggests that Trump has touted his border rhetoric to gain political advantage. To understand the impact of Trump’s future policies, people should visualize the experience of migrants. One way is to put yourself in the shoes of an everyday migrant attempting to cross the border. Suppose you were one of those migrants.
Which part of the border would you rather cross to avoid detection? How would you transcend the barrier? What could happen if the authorities catch you? If you apply for asylum, where would you remain? Why should your livelihood be valued differently than that of a United States citizen? Returning to your perspective, if you are a United States citizen, how and why would you vote in the 2024 election?
From his current and previous rhetoric, history warns us that a Donald Trump victory in 2024 could result in a further welfare deterioration and dehumanization of migrants. This is why the issue of immigration reform should be carefully resolved on facts instead of rhetoric. 

