In this research paper, I discuss how the changing field of firearms impacted the advantages of the Ottoman Empire in Hungary during Süleiman’s reign. I discuss different aspects of the impacts, from the design of the firearms, to the Ottoman advantage with technology and resources. I argue that firearms had a major impact on the Ottoman Empire’s advantage in Hungary during Süleiman I’s reign. I address many different counterarguments to how impactful the firearms were by explaining the causes for the successfulness of the Ottomans in Hungary. I conclude that firearms were very influential in Hungary during Süleiman I’s reign, which ultimately shaped the entire world. The Ottoman Empire was an influential force in Europe. While Europe enjoyed military superiority over many non-European nations, the Ottoman Empire proved to be their only but significant non-European competitor. The Ottomans had won many different wars against the Christian European states since the defeat in Nicopolis to the significant battle of Mohacs. Pope Pius II noted that Hungary is a key passage to Europe, which would leave Christian states vulnerable. While the Ottomans’ victorious streak of victory instilled fear in Christian Europe, their influence would fade. The empire would eventually come to a decline during its final centuries, facilitated by the difficulty in having access to firearms and their technology. This eventual decline of the Ottoman Empire shows that firearms were very important for the survival of an empire in Europe to have access to firearms. Süleiman I’s reign was a tipping point in the history of Europe. Along the Habsburg-Ottoman front, Hungary was strategically important due to its fortresses, many of which Süleiman I captured on his conquests. After the fall of Hungary, Süleiman I led an unsuccessful siege of Vienna. However, during this time, Europe experienced a firearm revolution, which led to firearms being used by many military forces throughout Europe. Firearms changed the power dynamics between Christian Europe and the Ottoman Empire. Overall, firearms had a major impact on Ottoman advantage in Hungary. This is due to some key advantages in the Ottomans’ accession of firearm technology, the resources needed for the firearms, and the organization of the military. While there are contradictions to the significance of firearms, they have limited effect on the impactfulness of firearms. Impacts of the firearm technology are evident in the organization of the Ottoman army. Süleiman armed elite troops with firearms, unlike his European rivals which armed lower ranked troops. This choice of who the firearms were given to likely had a positive impact on the Ottomans’ advantage since more skilled soldiers are less likely to be lost in battle. However, this could have resulted in greater casualties for the lower skilled soldiers due to the lack of efficacy of more primitive weapons. Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq’s letters show that the Janissaries had almost exclusively carried muskets. The Janissary reliance on firearms suggests that the Ottomans had been very successful in using the firearms. During the battle of Mohacs, a chronicler detailed that the Ottomans marched and fired in rows, allowing those who had just fired their guns to reload, while prior rows fired theirs. This row based strategy contributed to the Ottoman advantage due to the efficiency of the use of time with firing the arms toward their European rivals. Some of the Ottomans’ organizational advantage is evident within the weapon technology. The Ottoman muskets used in Hungary came with knives, allowing the bearer of the musket to defend themselves from the enemy. The combination of ranged weapons and held weaponry is one example of conveniences which advantaged the Ottomans over Christiendom. One important barrier to overcome for firearms to impact military and strategic advantage is the acquisition of the firearms. Christian and Muslim states had blocked the export of firearms, firearm technology, and materials like metal in order to maintain an advantage. These blockades highlight an important step that an empire must take to maintain a technological advantage. Despite the difficulty of acquiring technology, the Ottomans used different methods to acquire them. The firearms used in the campaigns came from various sources. The Ottomans gained some battlefield equipment from ships and fortresses that they captured. This capturing of battlefield assets is one method of how the Ottomans were able to get equipment necessary for their campaigns in Hungary. To get around trade barriers with enemies, the Ottomans relied on stealthy methods to obtain the weapons. The Ottomans used an illegal market trade with Christian Europe to obtain some firearm technology. This black market trade is another method of how the Ottomans were able to acquire the firearm technology used in Hungary. After considering the aforementioned methods, one might automatically assume that the Ottomans exclusively relied on foreign sources to acquire firearm technology. However, this is not the case. The Ottomans were capable of producing their own cannons, which were of similar reliability to their European counterparts. In addition to an element of self-reliance, the Ottomans led the technological developments for some time. Following the conquest of Constantinople, Mehmed II ordered the construction of one of the first cannon foundries in Europe. The cannon foundry is an example of how the Ottomans were able to produce their own versions of battlefield technology. After the first cannon foundry was created, the Ottomans established many other cannon foundries in different locations, including Buda. The additional different locations established for the construction of additional cannons shows how impactful they were on the Battlefield, highlighting the importance of technology. The Ottoman Empire also had a lead in some areas of firearm technology. The Habsburgs fighting in Hungary envied the quality of the Ottoman muskets, which had an effective design according to some historians of technology. While their muskets were very powerful, the Ottomans had a lead in other forms of military technology. Since 1464, the Ottomans produced a powerful type of cannon which utilized a high quality bronze, which their European rivals did not replicate. This technological advantage that the Ottomans maintained over the Europeans explains how the Ottomans were able to effectively defeat their rivals in Hungary. While the Ottomans hosted many advantages to firearm use, Christian Europe had begun to gain some advantage from them during the reign of Süleiman I. Spanish and German soldiers learned to use firearms in combination with other military equipment in an effective fighting style, leading to some Christian advantage during Süleiman I’s reign. This use of firearms by Ottoman opponents exemplifies the impactfulness of firearms. In addition to access to firearm technology, the Ottomans also had a resource advantage. The Ottoman Empire experienced twice as much revenue than the Holy Roman Empire during Süleiman. This advantage over other empires in revenue helped the Ottoman Empire acquire more and better firearm technology. In addition to monetary gain, the Ottoman Empire managed systems to acquire materials. The Ottoman Empire negotiated with some surrendering nations to allow them to export civilian goods, while the Ottomans had access to materials useful in war like metals. These agreements to accession permitted the Ottomans to build more firearms. Despite the many examples of how firearms benefited the Ottomans, there are many challenges to the significance of their role in Hungary during Süleiman I’s reign. Size of the army played a role in the organizational advantage that the Ottomans had, rather than only the firearms. The number of Janissaries greatly increased under Süleiman’s reign. This sharp increase can explain the successes of the Ottoman Empire in a different way than the firearm technology. However, this increased demand for soldiers was justified. Due to recent acquisitions, including Buda, the Ottoman Empire needed to station more troops in them. This justification is a rebuttal to the argument that the amount of troops impacted the Ottoman advantage more than the firearms, since an increase in territory requires a quantitative increase in troops. There were also limitations to how effective the quality of the firearms impacted Ottoman advantage. Firearm use was only advantageous when large enough numbers of troops and weapons were present. This limitation shows how the quantity of the firearm mattered more, rather than the technology, similarly to the simple advantage gained by having more troops. To explain the high number of firearms required, there are some limitations to the firearms. Busbecq notes that during the war between the Ottoman Empire and the Safavid Empire, the muskets used by the soldiers easily broke, and repair of these muskets required additional skill, rendering many of the muskets useless. This difficulty of repair and facility of brokenness forced the Ottomans to give a larger amount of firearms to the military than required if the muskets had better durability. Despite this barrier, the Ottomans have been able to get around it. The Ottomans utilized flotillas along the Danube river to transport weapons to Hungary effectively. This logistical efficiency allowed the Ottomans to arm more troops with firearms. The Ottomans maintained this advantage over the Habsburgs until the year seventeen hundred. The amount of time necessary for the Ottoman rivals to respond to the logistical problem emphasizes the advantage that the Ottomans had on the Hungarian front during Süleiman’s reign. Despite the significance of firearms, there are some limitations to how impactful they were. Despite the use of firearms in Mohacs, Archers proved more reliable and harmful to enemy troops than the guns in the war of Mezokeresztes. This substitution of bows for firearms suggests that the Ottomans realized some limitations in firearms. This is a contradiction to the firearms having an impact in Hungary during Süleiman. This contradiction can be explained by the skill level of the archers. Busbecq’s description of Ottoman Archers shows that they were trained well in order to pull a bow string by a long distance. The usefulness of the archers is an example of how the Ottoman Empire had a diverse variety of military advantages, and firearms played an individual role. In addition to the lack of reliability, there are factors that contributed to Ottoman Success distinct from the firearm revolution. One such counterexample is the lack of unity among Christian Europe. During the wars leading up to Süleiman’s reign, Pope Pius II said that if the provinces of Italy were aligned together, they could thwart Ottoman advances. Pius’s concern shows that the division within Christianity disadvantaged Europe against the Ottomans. This disadvantage removes emphasis on the importance of firearms, since the Ottoman enemy was weakened by disunity. Another part in the counterexample by lack of unity is the infighting between the Christian states. Wars between Christian states distracted them from the threat of the Ottoman Empire in Hungary. This infighting within Christendom gave the Ottomans a better advantage over Western Europe as the infighting consumed resources and manpower of the Christian states.
Despite the lack of unity in Europe, the Ottoman Empire also had some moments of disunity and instability. After a series of crimes and threats to power, Süleiman I executed one of his sons, Mustapha. While the execution of a son of a leader would cause some instability, the impact of the execution was complex. Many Janissaries grieved the loss of Mustapha following his execution and became more critical of Süleiman. This grieving shows how some Janissaries considered Mustapha to be very important, depicting a power struggle between Süleiman and Mustafa. The father versus son power struggle between Mustapha and Süleiman does not lack precedence. Selim I, father of Süleiman I, had allegedly assassinated his father, Bayezid II, in order to become Sultan. Selim I’s rise to power provides precedence to Mustapha’s execution, showing how disunity was not rare in the Ottoman Empire. Disunity in the Ottoman Empire removes some of the existing advantage that the Ottomans had over Europe, suggesting that other factors, like firearms, had a greater impact on the Ottoman Empire’s advantage in Hungary during Süleiman I. The impact of political disunity in the Ottoman empire proved to be limited, but not absent. During the middle of the 1500s, the Ottomans were able to score some victories over Christian Europe, despite some political disunity and technological problems. Their partial maintenance of victories shows that the firearms still held some advantage for the Ottomans. The impact of firearms on Ottoman advantage over western Europe set a precedent for the rise of another power. Due to the threat of the Ottoman Empire, many continental European powers had to spend resources on battles against the Ottoman Empire. This distraction and geographic isolation of England facilitated the economic prosperity of the country. The success of England shows how the initial successfulness of the Ottoman Empire inevitably led to a new world order. This threat from the Ottoman Empire eventually led to the discovery of the Americas due to the blocking of access to the east. This turn of events shows that firearms had a very large impact. If firearms had not been significantly present in the wars of Hungary, the Americas would not have been discovered in the way that they have. The English traded frequently with the Ottoman Empire after Süleiman I, supplying the Ottomans with firearms and materials for them to fight the Safavid Empire. This relationship between England and the Ottoman Empire shows how firearms continued to have an impact, even after Süleiman I and outside of Hungary. Western Europe eventually outcompeted the Ottoman Empire during its final centuries, leading to the true decline of the Ottoman Empire. This eventual decline of the Ottoman Empire proves that advancements in firearms were crucial for empires to maintain victory and avoid a collapse. Despite the acceptability of the significance of firearms in Hungary during Süleiman I, historical narratives still linger, suggesting Ottoman inferiority and ignoring the true role of the Ottomans. Some historians have naïvely showcased western European advantage in firearm technology and tactics over the Ottoman Empire. These opinions shared by some historians explain how one can fail to account for the variety of factors that influenced the Ottoman Empire. Some supporters of the faulty argument of decline have misattributed social and economic turmoil to military failure. This misattribution of history resulted in the hasty conclusion that the Ottoman Empire experienced a “decline” during Süleiman I. The true influence of firearms impacts the question of the time frame of the Ottoman Empire’s decline. Despite the touted notion of the Ottoman Empire, the empire did not decline in the time period following Süleiman due to their advantage in resources. This false decline shows how some have misinterpreted the true collapse of the Ottoman Empire and failed to recognize the core military factors of the Ottoman Empire. However, one who shared hasty assumptions can reconsider the Ottoman impact on the firearm revolution. They can do this by analyzing the impact of firearms during Süleiman’s reign in Hungary through resources, military organization, and accession of technology. Faulty narratives about the Ottoman Empire can be dispelled by considering the facts rather than prior assumptions. 

